Sinase is an application that allows you to simulate natural selection. It lets you set up an environment with creatures and food and observe how parameters like food growth or mutations of different traits affect the population.

If it is the first time you are trying this application, I highly recommend going through this tutorial once to get a basic idea of how it works.





F I R S T   S T E P S

1) Generate creatures and food using the population menu.

2) Start the flow of time using the time menu. In case time stops automatically increase the "simulate until" value and continue the simulation.

3) Wait until the properties of the creatures and environment have reached a point at where they are nearly constant. Use the statistics menu to watch the development of these properties.

4) Start changing parameters in the parameters menu. Don't make too many changes at once however, as you won't be able to properly see the effects of those changes. For instance, change the food growth or the creatures_start_energy. You can also allow some properties of the creatures to mutate by increasing the value of creature_[trait]_variation (0.1 is a good starting point here). Remember to validate and save your changes, otherwise they won't have any effect.

5) Watch how your changes affect the environment and population using the statistics menu.

6) Repeat 4) and 5).





T H E   B A S I C   C O N C E P T

Every creature has an initial energy level.
As time passes, the creature moves and its energy level decreases. If it finds food it eats it and its energy level rises.
If a creature runs out of energy, it dies. If it manages to double its initial energy value, it reproduces and the energy is equally split between the parent and child creatures. 

When a creature reproduces, the new creature might have slightly different traits than its parent. This is called mutation. The maximum degree of mutation of the individual traits can be set using the parameters menu.

The formula for energy consumption is size_weight * (size)³ * speed_weight * (speed)²





T R A I T S

Traits are attributes of creautres that can mutate between generations.
In the moment, there are only two of them:

SIZE:
Larger creatures have a higher chance of picking up food. Also, creatures can eat other creatures if they are at least 1.3 times larger. In this case, the larger creature gets all the energy of the smaller creature. However, larger creatures require more energy to move as their are heavier as well.

SPEED:
Faster creatures have a higher chance of picking up food, however they also require move a certain distance.





P A R A M E T E R S

food_growth_interval:
The interval in which food grows
A value of x means food will appear every x-th time unit.
A higher value results in less food growth.

food_growth_amount:
The amount of food that appears each time food grows

creature_initial_energy:
The creature's initial energy value
This parameter doesn't have big effects on the population.
If the value is to low however, population and food start flucuating.

creature_[trait]_min:
The minimum value a mutatable trait can have

creature_[trait]_max:
The maximum value a mutatable trait can have

creature_[trait]_variation:
The maximum difference between a creature's trait and its parent's trait
